# Professional Self Assessment
## Capstone Project for CS-499
### Southern New Hampshire University
### August 11th, 2020

# Professional Self-Assessment

## Part A: Computer Science Skills
When one encounters a problem in programming, solving it usually involves researching the syntax of the language, or walking through the program step by step to debug it. One would think that a Computer Science Degree is therefore mostly composed of writing programs and understanding the nature of technology. However, learning about computers is only a small part of the education necessary required to work with computers. 
During my computer science education, there were many courses involving art, humanities, history, and human interactions. These laid the foundation for the other aspect of working with Computers which is working with people. Almost no one creates programs alone, so learning to work with people and understand how people function is a huge part of a Computer Science education, and Computer Science careers. This assessment will show how my skills have been enhanced by my coursework and by my work on my e-portfolio in the concepts of collaboration, communication, data structures, algorithms, software engineering, database programming, and security.
### Collaborating in a team environment
The coursework performed during my Computer Science education was mostly of a non-collaborative effort. This does not mean that that it was me against the world, rather that the submitted work had to be independent in nature. Collaboration took on other forms when not working directly with people, collaboration might mean posting on a discussion board and responding to peers. Collaboration might mean that another student is asking for help via email, or has a question on a board, and that one answers the call for help. The point is that, whether or not I am working directly with someone, it is not possible to do things without a good network of people to rely on. This is ultimately what collaboration means: trust. Trust that I can rely on someone to submit work of a quality standard and on time and that they can trust in me to do the same. 
### Communicating to stakeholders
Every class taken is a lesson in communicating to a stakeholder. The students are stakeholders and the teachers are stake holders. The communication from the teacher is found in rubrics, feedback, and in the grades given. Sometimes when things go wrong, or advice is needed external communication is needed. In one of my first classes, there was a communication breakdown, which resulted in a conflict between the professor and me. It was only through communicating that we were able to resolve the issue. This is why that so much of course load is based on communications, because communication is a skill like any other. It is only through  rigorous practice that we can hope to improve our communication abilities. 
### Data structures and algorithms
Data structures and algorithms go hand in hand. In the coursework I have done I have been shown the importance of choosing the right data structure and the right algorithm. For instance, if we needed access to data that could be uniquely identified by name, we might choose a hash map or dictionary to find the data. An example of this would be creating a phone book app. Instead of searching millions of entries sequentially to find a single one if we had used a list or an array, we could use a hash map, hash the name we’re looking for and find the entry in the same amount of time for each search performed. This is how sites like Google can search billions of documents in milliseconds. This is akin to choosing the right tool for the job. When developing software, it is important to make the choices that produce the fastest and best results. 
### Software engineering
Anyone can write code for a program, the real key to developing software is in the design and architecture. Thus, software engineering is an essential part of a computer science degree and integral to reaching maximum employability. In the course Object Oriented Design, I learned about creating Functional Models where the first step is to find out what the user wants and then build the program from the user requirements. The user is usually the one who is paying for the project, whether the user is a branch within an organization, or a client outside the organization. Building software with the user in mind ensures that the software does not have additional features that the user does not want. 
Another key aspect of the coursework was learning about Agile methodologies in opposition to waterfall methodologies for developing software. Agile strives to build an iterative product that can handle changing requirements rapidly. In today’s software world, requirements can change, the software development needs to be able to respond quickly. Agile is not ideal for all projects, but it is another tool that software developers can use to decide how to best create and structure a project. 
### Databases
Before taking the courses in the Computer Science program, I understood that databases existed but not what they did except store data. As I progressed through the courses and coursework, I came to understand what data bases were by taking a SQL class. This introduced me to the concept of a relational database. 
Most recently in Client Server Development I came to understand what a document-based database looked like in a NoSQL database like MongoDB. I also came to understand the principles of a RESTful interface in which the server does not store user information, only reacts to a user’s requests. 
Understanding the different databases again provides tools to work with when developing and designing software. It is important to understand these differences to create programs that function at optimal efficiency, and with the highest security. 
### Security
Security is always a chief concern, or at least it should be a concern to any potential developer. Through the courses I have taken I have been made aware of more of the nuances to security, such as being aware of a buffer overflow attack or sanitizing data to prevent a SQL injection. One must continue learning to understand and mitigate potential future security risks. 

## Part B. Artifact Outcomes
To the person who can boast of lifting 1000 pounds, the crowd would rather see it done themselves. To the programmer who speaks of the qualities learned in Computer Science, the crowd would rather see a compiled program. To that end I have selected a singular artifact to display my technical prowess. I will speak to the outcomes that the artifact produces and how they connect to show proficiency. 
Although I have chosen a singular artifact to represent the abilities required, the artifact has been enhanced in several ways. Each enhancement corresponds to one or more outcomes. The three enhancements were in the categories of Software Design and Engineering, Data Structures and Algorithms, and lastly Databases. The e-portfolio as a whole also helps to fulfill additional course outcomes. Each section of the e-portfolio has been labeled in a corresponding fashion to make it easier to follow along. 
The artifact that I selected is a personal project labeled “The Last Days of the FyreBrund”. The artifact is a menu-based space trading game, that uses a text interface, and was built using Java. The next section will briefly describe each enhancement made during this course, and then go into detail about the outcomes achieved by each enhancement. 
### Enhancements
### Enhancement 0: Starting point
At this point the project is not yet a game. The player can buy a ship, add armaments to it, and change locations. The project is built on iteration so at this point the groundwork has been laid for adding more desired features. 
### Enhancement 1: Software Design and Engineering
This enhancement adds the ability for the player to buy and sell cargo. Although that may seem like a simple task, there has to be a way for a player to transfer and receive funds, there has to be merchandise for the player to buy, each planet must have its own desired goods for sale and to buy. So, for this enhancement to occur there must substantial pieces already in place. 
### Enhancement 2: Data Structures and Algorithms
This enhancement adds encounters in space. A game without a challenge is hardly a game at all. This enhancement decides if an encounter occurs, then builds an enemy of appropriate level, then adds weapons to the enemy based on the level. An enemy reuses the same data structure as a player, so all the commands such as adding a ship are reused. Once battle begins, turn order is selected, then the player or enemy makes a decision. The enemy bases their decision on the mathematical probability that they will win or lose. Thus, algorithms are used throughout this upgrade. 
### Enhancement 3: Databases
This enhancement uses databases to add additional functionality to the program. The user can choose to find ships by ship level, by name or partial name match, and by ship type. This is a small demonstration of what databases can do. With enough time the game could store all the player data on databases in servers, so that players could access their data anywhere, or choose to “fight” other players in Player Versus Player combat. Databases are powerful tools that enable enhanced functionality. 

### Outcomes
### [CS-499-01] Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science
This outcome is supported by two pillars of this e-portfolio Enhancement 1: Software Design and Engineering and the e-Portfolio as a whole. 
In Enhancement 1, the programming is supported by extensive documentation via comments, and good naming conventions. This enables the next programmer to easily understand the code and work with it. By making code easy to understand it creates a more collaborative environment. 
In the e-portfolio, there are narratives for each enhancement that go into detail about the enhancement and what it does. There is also a screen capture code review and this professional assessment. These items communicate information with respect to an audience who may not be familiar with technical specifics thus allowing diverse  audiences to understand it to help support organizational decision making. 

### [CS-499-02] Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts
This outcome is supported by the e-Portfolio. The e-portfolio includes links to a professional self-assessment, code narratives for each enhancement, a code review, and a summery of each enhancement on the page itself. These documents are professional in nature, technically sound, and adapted to specific audiences using language and analogies appropriate for the expected audiences of Computer Science professionals, hiring managers, and collegiate level reviewers. 

### [CS-499-03] Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices (data structures and algorithms)
This outcome is supported by Enhancement 2: Data Structures and Algorithms. Each type of data structure and algorithm have their strengths and weaknesses. For example, A dictionary or hash map has incredible speed, but must contain a unique value called a key to be found. A list or an array can hold multiple values that are the same, but it takes more time to search and sort to find the desired values. Enhancement 2 demonstrates proper data structure and algorithm choices by choosing the structure or algorithm that is most aligned to the purpose of the task. 

### [CS-499-04] Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals (software engineering/design/database)

This outcome is fulfilled by the 3 enhancements to the artifact.
Enhancement 1: Software Design and Engineering, uses functional decomposition, and object-oriented design principles to create sound structured code that is easy to read and maintain. The code is well commented and well named following well founded techniques. 
Enhancement 2: Data Structures and Algorithms, involves storing data according to the users’ needs and creating system routines that are capable of handling exceptions should they occur. This enhancement uses data structures that ensure the best performance while providing forgiving algorithms that do not crash the program if the user makes a mistake. 
Enhancement 3: Databases uses the established database MongoDB and uses drivers and function calls to make the use of known good code provided by the drivers. This enhancement mitigates potential crashes, by catching exceptions such as the user trying to access a non-running server. The rest of the program will continue to operate even if the server is offline. 

### [CS-499-05] Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources
Enhancement 1: Software Design and Engineering is the lens that focuses the security mindset. Functions are kept private, users have limited input abilities, exceptions are caught to prevent unwanted action by the program, source code is hosted on a secure website that requires a password, and only updated by authorized personal which is the author in this case. Following known best practices ensures that security exploits are kept to a minimum. Security must be in the foreground when designing applications and not an afterthought. Building with security in mind does not make a system invulnerable, merely it helps to protect the assets and prevent liabilities. 

## Conclusion 
The artifact produces the desired outcomes and shows the beginnings of what I am capable of. Through the coursework I have taken, and through the artifact’s construction I have learned much and grown. I have grown as a Professional, as a Computer Scientist, and as a Person. In addition, even after I complete the artifact, I will continue to grow my skills as a Professional, my curiosity as a Computer Scientist, and my humanity as a Person. There is no obstacle that cannot be overcome, no mountain that cannot be moved, and no river that cannot be crossed. My name is Mark Whiskeyman, and I am a Computer Science Professional. 
